_drafts/the-meltdown-vulnerability-an-explanation-for-non-it-people.markdown, before:

---
layout: "post"
title: "Why the Meltdown/Spectre vulnerability makes your processor leak your passwords. An explanation for non IT people"
date: "2018-01-05 20:06"
---

As we have all heard, there were several related hardware vulnerabilities affecting almost all computers/phones/processors sold since 1995. Those vulnerabilities make your CPU leak secret information to programs which should not have access to those secrets.

Those vulnerabilities are named [Meltdown][1] & [Spectre][2] and were discovered and responsibly reported by the **Project Zero** team at google around [June 2017][3]. Both are problems in how the CPU handles some optimizations to make programs run faster. One is more severe than the other, one is affecting almost all chips sold since 1995, the other mostly affects Intel chips. One can be prevented by a software update to the operating system (Windows/mac/Android....) with possible loss of performance, for the other the preventability via a software update is disputed. To fix the underlying problem in both cases requires a change to the chips hardwired architecture, which means we need to buy new processors once redesigned models are available (don't count on those to become available before 2019).

To illustrate how a processor works, let's introduce our office clerk Alice. Alice is sitting at a desk with a few drawers. Each drawer can contain a document. Since there are more documents than the desk has drawers, most documents are kept in an archive downstairs. When Alice needs a document that is not in one of the drawers, she sends someone from her staff to go grab it from the archive downstairs. Alice in this example is the processor (ignoring multithreading for the moment).

Now Alice has a customer Eve who gives her a list of instructions. Those instructions are simple. `If Document X contains letter B, write letter C to Document Y, if not write the letter C to Document Z`, and so on. Really simple instructions.

For security reasons Customers are not allowed to ever use instructions that are based on others customers documents. (You wouldn't want your neighbor to get your bank records) So Alice has to check if the referenced Documents really belong to the customer in front of her.

_Eve_ is a Customer and has access to her own documents **E1** and **E2**, but **NOT** to document **A38**.

## Let's begin....
_Eve(Customer)_: Hello. `When my Document **A38** contains the letter "1" write the letter "B" to my Document **E1**, if not write it to my Document **E2**`.<br>
_Alice(Clerk)_: Sure no problem, give me a second.

_Alice_ knows that she needs to check if all those Documents are belonging to _Eve_, so she sends one of her staff (_Bob_) downstairs to check if those Documents belong to _Eve_.

While _Bob_ is on his way, instead of just sitting around waiting (therefore wasting precious time) for _Bob_, _Alice_ predicts that everything probably is going to be alright (like almost always), so she continues to work on those instructions. In case _Bob_ comes back and tells her that the Documents did **not** belong to _Eve_, she can still abort and don't give _eve_ the requested information.

So now she looks up the first document **A38**. Since it's a document she has worked on earlier today, it is still in on of her drawers, so that she doesn't have to send someone downstairs to grab it.

She looks at the instruction again `If **A38** contains "1" write to **E1** otherwise write to **E2**`. She checks if **A38** contains "1". Hurray **A38** contains "1", so she now tries to write to **E1** as specified.

But **E1** is not in one of her drawers, so she sends _Dave_ downstairs to grab **E1**. For whatever reason _Bob_ is very slow today so _Dave_ gets back with **E1** and puts it in one of _Alice_ drawers before _Bob_ comes back.

_Alice_ now could go ahead and write to **E1** just as _Eve_ requested, but she has to wait for _Bob_ to return to confirm that _Eve_ really had access to **A38**.
_Bob_ returns and tells _Alice_ that _Eve_ does **NOT** have access to **A38**.

_Alice_ then yells at _Eve_ for requesting Documents she does not have access to.
_Eve_ apologizes and promises not to do it again.

So no harm was done, _Eve_ never saw anything of **A38** and no document was changed illegally. The only thing that changed are the Documents in the drawers, invisible to _Eve_. So we can all go home now.


## Or can we?
_Eve_ now secretly starts a stopwatch and gives _Alice_ a new instruction.

_Eve_: Please `Show me the content of my document **E1**`<br>
_Alice_: Sure no problem, give me a second.

_Alice_ now sends someone downstairs to check if _Eve_ has access to **E1**. While waiting _Alice_ looks up the requested document **E1** and finds it in one of her drawers. A minute later that staff member comes back and tells _Alice_ that everything is okay.

When _Alice_ begins to read out the content, _Eve_ stops the stopwatch and writes down how long it took for _Alice_ to fulfill her request.

Next _Eve_ requests the other Document **E2** and again starts the stopwatch.
_Alice_ again sends someone downstairs to check if _Eve_ has access to **E2**. While waiting she looks up **E2** but cannot find it in her drawers, so she sends another one downstairs to grab **E2**. A minute later the first staff member returns and tell _Alice_ that everything is okay and _Eve_ has access to **E2**.




[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meltdown_(security_vulnerability) "Wikipedia about Meltdown"
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spectre_(security_vulnerability) "Wikipedia about Spectre"
[3]: https://googleprojectzero.blogspot.de/ "Information by the Google Project Zero Team on the discovery of Meltdown/Spectre"

Commit message:

meltdown draft finished for review

_drafts/the-meltdown-vulnerability-an-explanation-for-non-it-people.markdown, after:

---
layout: "post"
title: "Why the Meltdown/Spectre vulnerability makes your processor leak your passwords. An explanation for non IT people"
date: "2018-01-05 20:06"
---

As we have all heard, there were several related hardware vulnerabilities affecting almost all computers/phones/processors sold since 1995. Those vulnerabilities make your CPU leak secret information to programs which should not have access to those secrets.

Those vulnerabilities are named [Meltdown][1] & [Spectre][2] and were discovered and responsibly reported by the **Project Zero** team at google around [June 2017][3]. Both are problems in how the CPU handles some optimizations to make programs run faster. One is more severe than the other, one is affecting almost all chips sold since 1995, the other mostly affects Intel chips. One can be prevented by a software update to the operating system (Windows/mac/Android....) with possible loss of performance, for the other the preventability via a software update is disputed. To fix the underlying problem in both cases requires a change to the chips hardwired architecture, which means we need to buy new processors once redesigned models are available (don't count on those to become available before 2019).

To illustrate how a processor works, let's introduce our office clerk Alice. Alice is sitting at a desk with a few drawers(cache). Each drawer can contain a document. Since there are more documents than the desk has drawers, most documents are kept in an archive downstairs. When Alice needs a document that is not in one of the drawers, she sends someone from her staff to go grab it from the archive downstairs(Main memory RAM). Alice in this example is the processor (ignoring multithreading for the moment).

Now Alice has a customer Eve who gives her a list of instructions. Those instructions are simple. `If Document X contains letter B, write letter C to Document Y, if not write the letter C to Document Z`, and so on. Really simple instructions.

For security reasons Customers are not allowed to ever use instructions that are based on others customers documents. (You wouldn't want your neighbor to get your bank records) So Alice has to check if the referenced Documents really belong to the customer in front of her.

_Eve_ is a Customer and has access to her own documents **E1** and **E2**, but **NOT** to document **A38**.

## Let's begin....
_Eve(Customer)_: Hello. `When my Document **A38** contains the letter "1" write the letter "B" to my Document **E1**, if not write it to my Document **E2**`.<br>
_Alice(Clerk)_: Sure no problem, give me a second.

_Alice_ knows that she needs to check if all those Documents are belonging to _Eve_, so she sends one of her staff (_Bob_) downstairs to check if those Documents belong to _Eve_.

While _Bob_ is on his way, instead of just sitting around waiting (therefore wasting precious time) for _Bob_, _Alice_ predicts that everything probably is going to be alright (like almost always), so she continues to work on those instructions. In case _Bob_ comes back and tells her that the Documents did **not** belong to _Eve_, she can still abort and don't give _eve_ the requested information.

So now she looks up the first document **A38**. Since it's a document she has worked on earlier today, it is still in on of her drawers, so that she doesn't have to send someone downstairs to grab it.

She looks at the instruction again `If **A38** contains "1" write to **E1** otherwise write to **E2**`. She checks if **A38** contains "1". Hurray **A38** contains "1", so she now tries to write to **E1** as specified.

But **E1** is not in one of her drawers, so she sends _Dave_ downstairs to grab **E1**. For whatever reason _Bob_ is very slow today so _Dave_ gets back with **E1** and puts it in one of _Alice_ drawers before _Bob_ comes back.

_Alice_ now could go ahead and write to **E1** just as _Eve_ requested, but she has to wait for _Bob_ to return to confirm that _Eve_ really had access to **A38**.
_Bob_ returns and tells _Alice_ that _Eve_ does **NOT** have access to **A38**.

_Alice_ then yells at _Eve_ for requesting Documents she does not have access to.
_Eve_ apologizes and promises not to do it again.

So no harm was done, _Eve_ never saw anything of **A38** and no document was changed illegally. The only thing that changed are the Documents in the drawers, invisible to _Eve_. So we can all go home now.


## Or can we?
_Eve_ now secretly starts a stopwatch and gives _Alice_ a new instruction.

_Eve_: Please `Show me the content of my document **E1**`<br>
_Alice_: Sure no problem, give me a second.

_Alice_ now sends someone downstairs to check if _Eve_ has access to **E1**. While waiting _Alice_ looks up the requested document **E1** and finds it in one of her drawers. A minute later that staff member comes back and tells _Alice_ that everything is okay.

When _Alice_ begins to read out the content, _Eve_ stops the stopwatch and writes down how long it took for _Alice_ to fulfill her request (1 minute 8 seconds).

Next _Eve_ requests the other Document **E2** and again starts the stopwatch.
_Alice_ again sends someone downstairs to check if _Eve_ has access to **E2**. While waiting she looks up **E2** but cannot find it in her drawers, so she sends another one downstairs to grab **E2**. A minute later the first staff member returns and tells _Alice_ that everything is okay and _Eve_ has access to **E2**.
Another minute later the seconds staff member returns with the requested document **E2**

When _Alice_ begins to read out the content of **E2**, _Eve_ stops the stopwatch and writes down how long it took for _Alice_ to fulfill the second request(2 minutes 3 seconds).

## What happened here?
When _Eve_ compares the two timings how long it took _Alice_ to fetch the documents (1 minute for **E1** and about 2 minutes for **E2**), _Eve_ can conclude that **E1** must have been in one of the drawers whereas **E2** was probably fetched from the archive downstairs.

`When my Document **A38** contains the letter "1" write the letter "B" to my Document **E1**, if not write it to my Document **E2**`

Together with the knowledge about the first instruction, which would lead to **E1** being placed in a drawer when the secret document **A38** contained "1" it can be inferred that **A38** probably contained "1" otherwise **E2** would have been placed in a drawer, even when _Eve_ did not gain/have access to **A38**.

Since computers only work with 1/0 you could just iterate through **A38** one letter at a time, until you have the whole document.

This kind of attack is called a [Side-channel attack][4] or (since there is a timing component) more precise a [timing attack][5] which is a subclass of [Side-channel attacks][4].

The core of the problem is, that _Alice_, to save time, predicts which ["branch" (if/else)][6] will be needed later, without yet knowing the actual result and [speculatively executes][7] the predicted branch and rolls back **ALL** changes if her prediction was wrong. This a major timesaver for moders computers, since it lets the cpu calculate data probably needed further down the line, based on the best-guess what code needs to be executed.
Example: When random number between 1 and 10 is less than 9.9 do A, else do B. After a few runs the branch predictor guesses that the next instruction will probably be A, so it already executes A while waiting for the random number. In case the prediction was wrong and the random number was 10, it rolls back its changes and instead executes B. This is slow, but in total it saved a lot of time by being right in 99% of the cases.

The problem exploited here is, that not **ALL** changes are rolled back, that documents thats were loaded into the cache/drawer based on the prediction remain in the cache. With the cache not being visible to the customer this is only a problem based on side-effects that are still observable later by realizing when a specific document must have come from the cache instead of main memory (archive) because the access was so fast.


Both [Meltdown][1] and [Spectre][2] use different variations of this approach and with different levels of sophistication.





[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meltdown_(security_vulnerability) "Wikipedia about Meltdown"
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spectre_(security_vulnerability) "Wikipedia about Spectre"
[3]: https://googleprojectzero.blogspot.de/ "Information by the Google Project Zero Team on the discovery of Meltdown/Spectre"
[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Side_channel_attack "Wikipedia on Side-channel attacks"
[5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timing_attack "Wikipedia on timing attacks"
[6]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Branch_prediction "Wikipedia on Branch prediction"
[7]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Speculative_execution "Wikipedia on speculative execution"
